so we're going to look at timing and we
can use that to judge how long it's
going to take us for a day's walk one of
the first things we need to do is to
know how many paces we take to 100
meters and that's in another clip
because once we've got that we can then
actually pay 200 meters and time it and
if we're doing let's say 2 minutes for
100 meters then that is 3 kilometers an
hour so that's the basis of our planning
for the day so let's say we're going to
do 15 kilometers then that is 5 hours
now let's say we're going to cross some
contour lines going uphill 60 and we add
a minute for each contour line so that's
another hour so at 6 hours and add an
hour for brakes we've got a seven hour
journey we don't tend to subtract time
when we go downhill unless it's very
steep you might add on a minute because
steep ground often people go much slower
on so that's got our planning
methodology and now we're going to look
in detail at the map it's to where we're
going to go and how we can use timing on
our route so our journey is going to
take us off along this path and
eventually over the stream here and and
beyond but in the first place let's see
how long it's going to take us to come
from the sceeto here which is where we
stood and around to the path Junction it
splits here now ever measure that I
reckon it's about 300 meters I actually
walk about four Kay's an hour which is
one and a half minutes per hundred
meters so that's about four and a half
minutes and to be honest there's maybe
one contour line I don't think I'll
really worry about that so four and a
half minutes from here
to the junction
yep well there we are there's my 300
meters and I was about 4 and a half
minutes which is right for me and pacing
and timings of both accurate about 90
percent there's a there for a 10 percent
error and if I've gone 300 meters 10
percent of that is 30 meters so if I
really hadn't found the path here that's
about the sort of extra distance I'd go
so we all have different paces and
different speeds and we just need to
know what our own individual rate of
movement is we can also adapt this in
more difficult terrain like the Heather
with experience we get to know our
pacing and our timing through that sort
of terrain you can use a GPS to help you
actually work some of that out it's also
useful to be able to take your pacing
later on in the day and start the day
everybody goes off pretty fast but if
someone's got blisters somebody's not
feeling so great
you can time how long it takes you to
100 meters recalculate your rate of
travel and then perhaps even change the
plan of the day so you're back in time
that you told people you'd be back for
you
okay so we've arrived at the junction
now and what we can do is we can confirm
which path is which and that's normally
done simply by setting the map so you
set the map and as you do that the we
end up with the red end of the needle on
the compass is pointing to the top of
the map where the title is and our map
then is orientated and we can see the
two pars pretty clearly on the map
mirroring what happens on the ground
there are occasions though when we come
across past junctions we're not very
certain which is where ticking the mist
and what we can then do is take a
bearing along the path we want on the
map and then actually using the compass
put that bearing onto the ground to see
which path is the best fit so I can take
a bearing along the path on the map here
so that's path we think we want to go
along so you can check that so I used in
a line I think it's a bit clearer to see
than using the edge the millimeter
markings kind of obscure that so if I
put that there and then I just turned
the dial until the lines in the capsule
line up with the north/south grid lines
on the map so once I have my bearing
I've got to get the red end of the
needle pointing to the end I just take
the compass off and I need to get the
compass like a coming straight out from
my chest pointing forward so often
holding it with two hand like that as I
turn around the needle comes to settle
in to the red arrow on the bottom of the
base plate and I'm looking down this
direction traveller and it's pointing
straight down the right-hand path so
that's the one I want